---
layout: post
title: Letter 1
---

You are almost 19 months old. Since June, I've been watching you grow up from a distance--over FaceTime I can see you point at planes in the sky and in pictures I see you watching traffic, putting "eyes on the street," sitting in the small green chair that you've dragged to the curb and placed at the end of your grandparent's driveway. I've left your mother with all the joy and toil of raising you which at this stage is simply preventing you from killing yourself.

During the day I sit at my desk in Africa, wondering if the world will go insane. Our presence here is "important," "vital," but it has this sort of numb surrealness--like being underwater and trying to make out the conversations and shimmering outlines of the people above you. American influence, and this includes war, proceeds via calendar invites and power point presentations. I don't know how it will all be in 20 or 25 years. I just know that things that go on tend to continue, and this War has been going on a long, long time.

But it's slow at the moment. I read books at my desk and wonder what you should know about this world. And what I have the expertise to help you understand. Perhaps someday you'll read these letters and learn something from them--about me, about the world, about living a good life hard as that may be to pin down or define.  

I've been reading a book on Edmund Burke and Abraham Lincoln. They dealt with much larger crises than I will likely face--the American Revolution, the Civil War--and I think they have something vital to say about conservatism and prudence, especially today when it's easy to feel that the world has always treated us kindly and that bad things happen somewhere else.

Prudence. I speak of it here with respect to men and society, politics, government, and getting along with others.

It is easy to see the failings of the current world and to envision a better one in its place. It has none of the things you hate and all the things you think you need. And under the soft, dim bulb of our imagination it all runs flawlessly. Realizing that nothing works so well in the world-as-it-is as it does in our heads, prudence is a profound wariness at tearing down what stands before us, illogical, ad-hoc, and frankenstein though it may seem, in favor of something more perfect and coherent in the abstract.

Prudence is not only understanding the limitations of human perspicacity but being deeply humbled by it. It is being awed by and respectful of the fantastic complexity of human psychology and human society and our limited insight into either.

Prudence is understanding that we must often choose between the lesser of two evils, and that there are almost no decisions of true gravity that entail no negative consequence.

Prudence is not dismissing the contextual for the generalizable. Science is our greatest tool for saying true things about the world, but some things happen so infrequently that it can be difficult to tease apart the true causes from the extraneous details. Revolutions are rare, yet we may be asked to support or condemn them and our choices matter. Consider the concrete circumstances and not simply the abstract ideals that are at stake.

Choose practical means that get you closer to idealized ends. Lincoln despised slavery and wanted to see it end but said, "Do nothing through passion and ill temper. Even though the southern people will not so much as listen to us, let us calmly consider their demands, and yield to them if, in our deliberate view of our duty, we possibly can." For slavery to end in the United States, there had to be a United States to end it. Edmund Burke understood that Britain had a legitimate right to tax the American colonies but it wasn't worth risking their rebellion.

Prudence is not cowardice or waffling. It is staying focused on your terminal goals and choosing pragmatic ways of achieving them. But once you have made a decision, act decisively.

Burke also said that one should not reason from the extremes to the ordinary. The American colonists were in a furor over taxes, but they did not generally act this way, and Britain should not suppress them as if they did. So, I suppose this makes me question how applicable this guidance is. You will likely not deal with rebellion and civil war, so should we expect that the methods used to navigate such crises would be applicable to the everyday trials of family and career and personal excellence that we most typically encounter? It's worth considering, and perhaps there are some important differences to explore, but I'll leave it here for now.

Love,
Your Father
